Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the Center.
I'm your host as always Ricardo Lobs.
And today I'm joined for a third time by Doctor Robert
Sapolsky.
And today we're talking about his latest book,
Determined The Science of Life without free will.
And I'm also leaving the links to our first two interviews
in the description of this one. So Doctor
Sapolsky, welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Well, likewise seeing you again and uh
glad we're on the other side of the pandemic. A pleasure to be here.
OK.
So in our first two interviews,
we talked a lot about the science of human behavior and this time focusing on
questions surrounding free will and determinism.
Are there specific aspects of the science of human behavior that you would
deem to be the most important here when considering these types of questions?
Well, um just as a preamble, my, my
song and dance is that
there's no free will. We have none whatsoever.
Um which puts me fairly
far on the extreme of the continuum of people thinking about this. Um
but that we have no free will at all. And
this is relevant to everything about how we became, who became uh individually,
all of that, why you just did what you did.
Um But
in terms of where that's most important,
um
just to focus on the very narrow area, which
is anything but narrow.
Um The biggest implication of that is none of us are entitled
to anything.
None of us have earned
to be treated any differently than anyone else.
Of course, we may need to be treated differently.
Uh Like if you're uncontrollably violent,
people have to be protected from you.
Um If you have extremely good motor skills through no,
you know, achievement of your own,
uh Maybe you're a candidate to be a good neurosurgeon,
but none of us have earned the right to have our needs
be considered more important than anyone else's.
And so, uh it's one thing to try to answer the question of free will.
I mean, if it exists or not, but another thing is why and when people believe
in free will, I mean, are there specific
cues that people pay attention to specific variables that play a role in how much
free will people attribute to themselves or to
someone else when evaluating a particular action?
Well,
you're right and people almost universally
uh believe that they are the agents of their action.
Um Like 90% of philosophers fall into a camp uh
called compatible list views of free will.
These are people, they're not saying there's magic,
they're not taking theological stances, whatever they say.
Yeah, the world is made of atoms,
we're made of cells like we believe in all that stuff.
Yet,
somehow
here's how free will still like pops out of your brain
and do a lot of hand waving at that point.
Um So it's incredibly common view.
Um Like
all of our other features of our beliefs and temperaments,
um It's kind of context dependent
people really,
really are more likely to believe in free will
if someone's complimenting them and saying good job,
they're really looking
like to like, likely to under circumstances where things have come up short. I mean,
there's, there's this classic dichotomy and sort of us, them thinking
that with them, when thems do something awful,
it's constitutional.
That's what they're like. They've always been like, they'll always be like,
and when one of us does something awful, it's situational.
Yeah, you have to understand they were under a lot of stress,
there were financial pressures, they had just been whatever, um,
as to how stable our us
this is
and we're often being pretty nasty when we're attributing
unchangeable
them ness
to them.
Um, in that regard, we're very,
very malleable when it comes to how characteristically free
we are. When things are going well, people believe in free will when
things are not,
there's a tendency to go in the other direction but not in a globalized.
There's no free will whatsoever. Here's the extenuating circumstance
that screwed me up just now that kept me from being the wondrous free,
consistent person that I am.
Yeah, something came up. But overall, overall we are the captains of our fate.
Mhm
But uh let me ask you about one criticism that perhaps many people,
scientists particularly would have
of uh your position. So we have a, a
good understanding or at least to some extent of the science of human behavior,
the factors that play a role there
uh from genetics to the environment and culture.
But uh I mean, there's still lots and lots of details that we are missing.
And it's really hard to be able to
predict with a very high level of accuracy how
people will behave in any particular point in time.
So,
the fact that there's
still fairly low predictability,
do you think that that's an argument against your position?
Um No, and that's, that's like a fantastic counter
ment to bring up because
it's very essential. It, it obviously is very essential. Um
Like I, I have sort of a hobby by now that I
uh help uh public defenders uh who
are lawyers defending poor people who can't afford
uh their own lawyers in murder cases for people who have a history of traumatic
childhoods, uh concussive head trauma and such teaching juries about the brain.
And what always happens is I get to do a two hour
presentation
and then the prosecuting attorney gets to cross examine me
and they always nail me on exactly these lines.
So, are you saying every single person
with this type of brain damage would do what this guy did?
I'd say, no,
we can't say that. Could you have predicted this guy?
No, we can't.
Um
Part of it, a
fundamentally deep response is
um
when you look at
uh
chaotic systems, systems that run on chaotic system,
like us, our brains, our cells, our molecules, our societies,
um
a
critical thing about them is they are unpredictable.
They're still deterministic and lots of people mistake sort of chaotic
and the unpredictability of it as proof
that somehow we could transcend our molecules.
But on that level, in this very fundamental way, um
systems that are entirely deterministic
can nonetheless be completely unpredictable. A much more mundane answer is,
well, yeah, we're still finding out stuff.
And when you look at our knowledge about sort of the biology of human behavior,
like 99% of what we've learned about it has been in the last century,
75% has been in the last 50 years, 51% has been in the last decade,
25% of it has been since like we started this broadcast or whatever,
like the rate at which knowledge is pouring in
is incredibly fast. So there, there's this sort of indirect cheating
strategy that one can then say, which is
OK if we're all going to accept that tonight. At midnight. That's it.
Science is done.
We're never gonna find out anything new again.
This is everything we know at this point.
The answer is, yeah.
Nonetheless, we can't predict a whole lot about human behavior.
Um But everything we know about the exponential increase in knowledge
is over and over and over,
we're gonna continue this pattern of saying,
oh,
I had no idea. Biology had something to do with that.
And
like you have a choice at this point,
do you wanna be on the cutting edge of viewing that
we are nothing more or less than biological machines or do you
wanna be like the history of science example in a century of
just the primitiveness of what people still believed at the time.
And so one of the things uh also that people bring
to the table in discussions surrounding free will and that people use
in law and in the courtroom has to do with intent.
So,
from a scientific perspective,
what is intent exactly? And what do we know about it?
And do you think that
its intent in any way would make for a good case for
free will in any way?
Yes. Let me, let me just
be really uh sort of over the top here. Um As a scientist, my definition of intent
as a subject to consider when thinking about free will.
Um intent can be defined as boring as hell and totally irrelevant.
Um
OK. Why is that? Um the entire legal system, as you said, runs on that.
Um, when somebody did something awful, did they intend to do it?
And did they know that they had alternative options?
Um And did they understand what the consequences were going to be?
Um And if the answer to all of that is? Yeah, lock them up.
They intended to do what they did
and they knew there were alternatives. Um
And in sort of the neuroscience
world of free will where intent comes in is the most
influential crazy making experiment of all time in the field.
This is something that came in the early 19 eighties by a man named Benjamin Lit.
And you read any paper about the biology of free will
and like the person is almost required by law to mention lit
by the second paragraph, these were these amazing studies. He took people
and wired them up with sort of electroencephalograms,
eegs to record brain activity in different areas.
This was like Neanderthal era technology at the time,
you couldn't do brain imaging then.
But this very simple approach. Um
he said to people,
OK, whenever you want,
press this button
and they had things to tell when the pressing process actually
started by seeing when muscles started constricting in his arm.
And they could see what was happening in the motor cortex,
the part of the brain telling those muscles and they could see the parts of the brain
that would tell another part to tell another part to tell the motor cortex to do that.
And the earth shattering finding that he came up with was all
of this playing out in about a half second or so.
You could tell when the brain had decided it was time to press the button
because before the person was conscious of their intention to do it
by about 200 milliseconds, 2/10 of a second.
And oh my God,
your brain has decided before you were conscious of intending to do this.
And
everyone like went crazy over this because this is just proven
there was no free will until like people started arguing about.
When do you become aware of intention?
And is that different from when you intend to do something? And,
and you know, all this philosophical stuff of,
is there a difference between intending to do something
and intending to stop yourself from doing something?
The difference between free will and free won't?
And they're still fighting about this. This is 40 years later
for a scientist, there was like a paper a couple of years ago entitled like Livid.
Had no idea what he was talking about or,
or something slightly more like formal than that
for people to still be telling you that your
science was wrong 40 years after you did it,
this is like immortality for a scientist.
They're still fighting about what this finding means. Does your brain
know that you're intending to do something before you're consciously aware of it.
And I scream every time I see yet another one of these studies because as I said,
it's boring as hell and totally irrelevant.
And in a courtroom as well, did this person intend to do that?
Because none of it asks the only relevant question there is. Oh, yeah.
Where did that intent come from?
Where did it come from in the first place?
Because to answer the question of,
did the brain
have intent before you did that's playing out in 2/10 of a second
when you're asking, where did that intent come from?
What does that have to do with what was going on in your brain one second ago?
And what was happening in the environment one minute ago?
And what hormone levels were like one day ago and
how traumatic or stimulating the previous one year had been
and what your adolescence was like in your childhood
and your fetal life and your genes and the
culture your ancestors invented because that influenced how your
mother was raising you within a minute of birth.
Where did that intent come from?
And the metaphor I use in the book is deciding whether or not
there's free will based on what's going on in that last half second
and only knowing what the intent was is like deciding whether you like
a movie or not by just having seen the final three minutes of it
because you've missed everything.
It doesn't matter if the person intended to or not. Where did that intent come from?
And that's
where the legal system
falls apart in terms of their thinking about,
you know, punishment and blame.
And that's where most thinking about whether or
not there's free will falls apart because everybody is
just interested in their brain imaging studies telling
you what happened in the last three milliseconds.
And that tells you nothing
because something about what happened to you this morning
had something to do with it.
Something about your fetal life had something to do with it.
Something about the culture, your answer came up with 500 years ago,
had something to do with it.
And when you look at all those pieces from one second
before to millennia before and you put all those pieces together,
there's not a damn inch in there to shoehorn in an
ocean of free will operating independent of all of that stuff.
Mhm
So when it comes to behavioral science,
we always hear about nature versus nurture genes, the environment
does when it comes to free will specifically, does it matter at all
if uh
we're talking about uh for example, biological factors or environmental factors?
I mean,
do we have any more control, for example,
over our environment and how it affects our behavior
than we have over our gyms,
-- for
-- example,
zero in both cases in the fundamental ways.
I mean, what one is obliged to do in my business at this point is saying,
nature and nurture always interact and you can't pull them apart and asking which
contributes more is like what's contributing more to the area of this rectangle,
the length or the width they always interact and
that sort of thing um within this realm. Um
The summary I would get at is we are nothing more or less than the sum of our biology,
which we had no control over and its interactions with the sum of our environment
over which we had no control over.
And they're completely inseparable.
I mean, it's the simplest example of like, oh,
how important was environment in this sort
of case and its interaction with biology?
Wow, what explains the fact that I'm sitting here right now and have
a occupation that carries some prestige and westernized culture
and all of that, what did environment have to do with it?
Starting with environment prenatal environment.
The fact that my, my mother was not suffering from malaria or
Chagas disease or like any such thing and wasn't protein
starved because she was a nomadic pastoralist in the Sahel,
in Africa.
And like,
oh, like we're talking like at that level already. That's like what we're talking
already at that level.
That's part of the brain that you wound up being uh handed to you here in adulthood.
Um All of that stuff matters and it's inseparable.
Mhm
One very interesting thing that you talk about in the
book is the Behavioral Science slash Biology of luck.
What is that about
it? It's, that's
ultimately everything,
everything we're talking about here.
Um
Another way of saying, oh,
the sum of our biology and this interaction with the sum of our
environment is we are nothing more or less than the outcome of our luck
and anyone who claims
otherwise that
they earned their good luck or that it makes sense to punish them for their bad luck.
Um
All we are
is the outcome of biology, interacting with environment in the context of luck.
And there's this whole thing like child development, um try to make sense of
who turns out to be like the the
violent adults and the drug addicts and all the,
all the bad outcomes and like no surprise childhood has a huge amount to do with it
and it's been formalized into this thing.
Um At least in sort of uh United States called your
ace score A ce the sum of your adverse childhood experiences.
And there's this ace like questionnaire scoring system where you can get from 0 to 10
and zero is you had no adversity 10 is like you
had all of the following 10 horrible things happen to you.
Were you
a witness to physical violence
or psychological violence at home?
Were you a victim of physical violence or psychological violence?
Were you a victim of sexual abuse? Were you in a broken family?
Was there a weapon at home when you was there,
a family member who was incarcerated this whole list there going from 0 to 10.
Um, and what you see is for every single step,
every point you add to somebody's ace score.
Um, there's about a 35% increased likelihood
that they're going to be involved in violent
antisocial behavior by the time they're adult.
If they're a male,
there's about a 35% increased chance that they're gonna have a teenage pregnancy.
If they're female,
about a 35% increased chance of either that they're gonna have
substance abuse and addiction problems every step in the way.
And this is one way of formalizing like this
is the quantified science of shitty luck in childhood.
And it has always struck me that at the same time. Instead of making it
an adverse childhood experience score,
you could make a ridiculously lucky childhood experience score.
Did your
parent or parents read books to you?
Did you have a stable income? Um Did you never have to worry about food?
Did you play games and laugh at home? Whatever?
Come up with a score of that and it's gonna tell you forever.
Each step in those,
there's a 35% increase that you're gonna be working a prestigious white
collar job someday and have an office and a secretary or who knows
just a different way of explaining the same thing.
Um
Everything that we frame as morality is instead the outcome or of good or bad luck.
And we have built a world in which we punish or reward people
over the luck they had nothing to do with.
Mhm.
But, uh, as we go through, uh childhood adolescence,
adulthood and our prefrontal cortices develop,
we tend to gain or acquire more self-control, more impulse control.
Does that not count at least as a few more degrees of rhythm?
Right.
Let's look at the sentence you just said as we get older, don't we acquire
more frontal cortical self control? What does acquire mean?
It means you're lucky enough to be in an environment
that would have taught you that
it means you're lucky enough to have a brain at
that point where you could learn from those experiences.
It means that you're lucky enough that the counter examples every day
when you finish school and went outside and there was the,
your gang telling you let's go rob that liquor store.
Um Let's do something impulsive that reinforces
your frontal cortex not working very well.
How many of those were going on at the end of the day?
Do you go home and you're bullied by somebody at home and anything
you heard during the day about like the wonderful path ahead of you?
Thanks to self control goes out the window. Be
Yeah,
we learned. Oh, wow.
Didn't you learn somewhere along the way that self control is a bad thing for you if
you're a fetus and your mother is very
stressed and secreting a lot of stress hormones.
You're going to be born with a
frontal cortex that's already less developed than average
and
newborns.
Meaning 15 years later,
you're getting great lessons in life about the importance of self control.
And by the time you were a damn fetus, you were already less likely than average
to be able to learn those lessons and benefit from them every step along the way.
Where did that intent come from? Where did that learning come from?
Where did the opportunity for that learning come from?
And it's always, you know,
all that stuff that brought you to this moment over which you had no control.
And when it comes to our psychological traits, we know, for example,
from disciplines like behavior genetics that there's the role of genes and then the
shared environment, the non shared environment,
unique experiences we go through.
Isn't there any space at all there for some,
uh I mean, for us to have some sort of be, be able to play some active role
in the kind of person that we're going to become?
Absolutely.
Um And that's one of the ways in which
uh people should avoid the hysteria of deciding genes,
determine everything that genes are the most interesting things.
If nothing else, you have this whole field of epigenetics,
the ways in which experience
can change
how readily genes of yours are turned on or off.
For the rest of your life in some cases. OK.
So we're moved away from a genetic deterministic picture for a zillion reasons,
uh both biological and environmental.
Um But you're saying, can't we choose
to take an action
to take a conscious action which will change our destiny?
And the answer is
not in the slightest,
you look at two people who were given an opportunity
and one is this person who every single split in the road,
they always take the wrong direction.
They never miss an opportunity to miss an opportunity at everyone. You could have.
They,
they would have given you that job. They were offering you a scholarship.
The guy said you didn't have to drive the car when they were going to do the robbery and
oh my God, every time that person makes the wrong choice,
every time they come up with the wrong intent
and where did that come from? And when we seemingly have made a major
decision
on our part
about something in life, are you
going to rob the store? Are you going to study hard?
Are you gonna propose marriage to this person or you? Who knows what? Um
And that feels intent.
Um
Everything about the biology and this interaction
with the environment that came before that
is what brought you to that moment.
Like from everything.
Like if you're hungry,
you're more likely to commit an antisocial violent act.
If somebody smells good to you, their pheromones, you're more likely to find them.
You claim that they are more vis
visually physically attractive if you,
you know all this stuff, what,
what
this,
at the split in the road? Do you make the right decision or not?
What this taps into is? I think
the most pernicious way in
which people hold on to. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
There's biology and we have brains and all of that and it just made a brain gunk.
Um, but we have free will, we have free will. Is this dichotomy people bring in?
You look at somebody
who's 7 ft four and of course,
they're a great basketball player or you look at somebody
and they have particular ratio of slow twitch to fast
twitch fibers in their leg muscles and of course they
turn out to be a good marathoner or maybe even
you understand enough about receptors for this or that neurotransmitter.
And of course they have a good memory or good. Any of these.
We're pretty good at accepting the biology
of what our natural attributes are.
Some people have lovely voices and others don't.
And they're never gonna sing in an opera.
Some people have, yes, there's these natural attributes. OK. Ok. Ok.
Science biology has something to do with that.
But oh, where free will comes in is what you do with your attributes?
Do you squander them? Do you work hard to overcome your limitations?
Do you,
are you one of these people like you go
on youtube and there's unbelievable examples of this,
of like marathoners and like important races where they collapse
53 ft from the finish line and they crawl,
they crawl to the very end.
And you say, oh my God, this is amazing with what they did with what they were given.
Or you find like somebody raised in poverty in a
horrible neighborhood and all of that who somehow winds up
like with their Nobel Prize at the other end,
or somebody who grows up in great wealth and privilege and
they're a junkie by the time they're 20
they've spent half their fortune.
Oh,
your attributes
you have no control over. That's the biology.
What do you do with the attributes?
That's where we have a world of,
oh, what a self
indulgent squander.
What an inspiring role model, how they worked to overcome.
There's something in there
that we believe that things like your memory
or whether you have perfect pitch or things like that are made of biology
and how hard you work and your self control and how indulgent you are and all of that
somehow that's made of other stuff that's not made of biology.
And when you look at it like what happened to you as a fetus
is going to have something to do with the construction of your part of the brain
that has something to do with whether it splits in the road,
you always make the bad decision,
you every step of this is biology as well.
Um But there's this very strong emotional pull
to differentiate between the two
and
willpower and backbone and fortitude and all of that,
that's the stuff we admire because that's the true measure of who somebody is
independent of their neurons and molecules of it's made of the same stuff.
And so um is there any space for
an idea like meritocracy in this sort of deterministic
world? I mean, if someone just so happens to have
the psychological traits that tend to correlate with success,
for example, in industrialized societies, like greed, conscientiousness,
high intelligence and so on.
Should we at
from, from a scientific perspective?
Of course, I'm not talking about uh philosophy,
a philosophical perspective nor any of that.
Does it make sense to attribute any personal merit to them?
Yeah.
Um
The only possible,
scientifically acceptable and morally acceptable conclusion from all of this is
there's no circumstance in which blame and punishment
make moral sense or are
uh are good things in and of themselves.
And likewise,
there's no circumstance in which praise and reward are virtues in
and of themselves because nobody earned one or the other,
that sort of thing.
This comes with two provisos though
um
the first one is
like every now and then
it's useful to punish someone because it changes their behavior in an effective
way or it's useful to praise somebody because in an instrumental sense.
Um
Praise and blame could be useful,
not because of what somebody did in the past that this is retribute but
for shaping their future behavior just in
like a psychological engineering kind of way.
Um So that's not saying it's not possible,
it's never useful, but
just as another way of
influence the influencing the biological machine.
Um The more fundamental level is
when you say crazy stuff like I just did to people they say,
oh,
so you want just murderers running around the streets
or?
Oh,
you just want it randomly picked who's going to
do brain surgery to take out your tumor.
No, of course not.
Even if you get rid of the entire criminal justice system
as it now appears.
And as we should,
because it's built on biological nonsense of the most destructive kind.
Nonetheless,
people who are uncontrollably dangerous and violent where you can't fix them,
you gotta protect people from them.
Um, a car whose brakes don't work.
You don't let it out on the street, you put it in the garage and you like,
don't drive it,
but you don't preach to either that violent person
or to the car whose brakes don't work that they have a
crummy rotten soul and they don't deserve to be able to do this
and what you have to do instead is use a term that's more and more in like this.
People thinking this way is they have to be quarantined,
quarantine them so that they're not dangerous to anyone and not an inch more.
And not because there's anything about it that
they deserve the brakes don't work on their car
and then the flip side is exactly the same. Oh, my God.
So, what, we should just have a random lottery as to who,
who, like,
does brain surgery on you. No, of course not.
Just as you can't have dangerous people on the street,
You need the most competent people out there
doing the medicine, doing the
legal stuff, writing whatever it is that takes
um skill
that matters,
that's really important.
But
you just the same,
you can't sit there and tell that person because they have a wonderful soul or
a wonderful self discipline or whatever that they
deserve to have this ridiculously large income.
Like
a world built around blaming people for their antisocial behavior
makes no sense.
And a world built around rewarding people for their
prosocial behavior or their expertise makes no sense either.
Um And is ultimately
just as morally
corrupt
because if you say you are a brain surgeon
and getting enormous societal prestige
because you did something where you earned it, you deserve to do that
and be in that position makes as little sense biologically as saying
the brain,
the uh the murderer with a history of frontal cortical
damage deserves to be in prison all of that.
Um Yeah, it's the flip side.
A meritocracy makes no sense. A
justice system built around retribution makes no sense either.
But at the same time, dangerous people should not be allowed to damage people.
And competent people should be more likely to
be running the world than less competent people.
But no one should feel shame or pride
for which end of those Katina
they wind up on.
But even if there's not really space for
blame or praise or to consider
or to think that someone is responsible for their own actions,
do you think that it would still make sense to talk about punishment?
At least as a deterrence measure
or for example,
blaming or praising someone just because we know scientifically that if we do that,
we would be disincentivizing bad behavior,
incentivizing good behavior and conditioning people to behave in
better ways.
Absolutely.
And
it's the same biology that like you take a,
a sea snail and it could learn that when you like bop it on the head with a pencil,
it retracts its
gill mechanism or some.
Yeah,
you can shape
sea snails behavior, you could shape human behavior,
you could shape human behavior to be more or less adaptive, blah, blah, all of that.
And
yeah.
Yeah,
sometimes it requires punishment and sometimes it requires praise and reward.
Um But
just because
that's like another thing you can do,
sometimes
intervene with somebody who's got problems and
make sure they uh they get enough calories in their diet
and things will go better sometimes like you hit someone over the head and say they,
they can't do this anymore and they'll stop doing some rotten behavior.
Yes.
But never with a sense that you are doing a moral good
because that's completely irrelevant.
It's just another realm in which
we as biological machines can be shaped in our behavior.
And what do you think about, uh, the idea that some people put forth that, uh, ok,
even if we know that free will does not exist
that it doesn't make sense to talk about free will.
People should still believe in free will because if they don't,
they will be
worse people. I mean, do you, or do you think on the other hand that, uh,
telling people that,
uh,
they should abandon their belief in free will would actually improve their lives?
Ok. This is, this is ultimately like
the most important question to ask whether or not we have free will.
Should we all believe that we do?
Um,
one worry which you bring up is if we stop believing in free will,
we're all gonna become murderers and cheats and liars and we will run amok.
Um And this is the thing people worry about,
uh, most instantly and there's a cruel experimental psychology literature
showing that if you take like volunteer test subjects and you manipulate them
into feeling like there is less free will than they thought there was
10 minutes later, they're more likely to cheat on a test,
they're more likely to do something crummy to somebody else.
When they're playing a game,
morality and ethical behavior goes down.
That's it. That's exactly what,
like the problem is when you tell people, um,
like you can't be held responsible for anything.
They've run
amok.
Just like if you convince someone that there
is no God and thus there's no punishment,
they run amok also.
And then you look closer at it
and because there's this parallel literature, you
have test subjects and you convince them, manipulate them into believing,
lesson God and right afterward, they cheat more and they do the same crummy stuff.
But now you do a different version of these studies,
get someone who comes in and says, I haven't believed in free will for 10 years
or I haven't believed in God since I was a teenager or any.
You get people who have thought that way and felt
that way for a long time who got there.
Not because some like psychology professor
is manipulating them in this environment.
But you get people like that
who've thought through this for a long time. And they are exactly as moral
as the most religious people and the people with
the strongest sense of belief in free will.
And this fascinates me,
like in terms of the God issue,
you look at people who very, very strongly believe in God
and the whole
show that goes along with that or very, very strongly believes there is no God.
And as I said,
there's no difference in their levels of ethical behavior
and it's very high in both cases who are the ones who are less ethical,
the ones who are in between,
the ones who say, oh, I don't know,
I guess there's God and like,
I make sure the kids learn something about it because it's good for them and like,
the, the ho
are good or say God, I don't, I don't actually care.
Maybe there's not a God, but it's like, what does it have to do with me?
The people who are like
indifferently religious or apathetically atheistic, the ones in the middle,
those are the ones who you readily manipulate their moral behavior,
one direction or the other.
If you've spent a hell of a long time sitting and thinking about
the root of human goodness and evil and what we owe our
fellow humans and is their purpose in life that transcends us.
It doesn't really matter if your conclusion is there is a God or there
is no God or we're free agents or we have no free will whatsoever.
You're one of the ones who thought long and hard about it
and both sets of conclusions you come out as being more ethically
moral
than your average person.
Um
So people are not going to run amok
if they are raised from the very beginning
to think this is not a world where it is fair. To blame anyone
and I don't deserve to get this or that reward more than anyone else.
They're going to be past the notion. Oh,
no one's gonna hold me responsible. I can go and stab the old lady
there with any luck to be past that by the time they're like, 20 years old.
And I was here hearing all the time people saying that
hard determinist were all nihilists and atheists and they were all the time,
-- uh, pillaging and raping and murdering people.
-- Exactly. Because that's,
that's the logical first thing.
Um, the logical second thing that was also, went back
in your question is when you get past, oh,
should I run amok and do whatever I want all of that is, should I get depressed as hell?
Because there's no purpose to any of this?
There's this huge existential void out there.
Should I like, is this terrible thing to have people believe
in terms of their mental health and stuff? Um,
and a point,
like,
it took me five years to write this book and the 1st 4.5
years I was thinking the answer to that was gonna have to be.
Yeah. And that sucks. And it's awful.
But, you know, that's how things work and, like, come on,
we need to be adults and face reality
and it finally struck me
the much more meaningful answer to it,
which is, if you are convinced there's no free will
and you get totally depressed and empty
void because it means your accomplishments.
You didn't really earn that.
The people who loved you don't really love you for who you are.
But for biological stuff that you helped this old woman cross the street just now.
Not because you're a good person, but because that's how you function as machine.
All that.
Oh my God. This is so depressing. If that's your response,
you're one of the lucky ones.
You've got the luck and privilege to sit there and say,
oh my God, maybe I really didn't earn my wonderful university degree.
Oh my God.
Maybe I didn't really deserve to be liked by people because of my personality.
If you're someone who has spent your whole life paying the price of
your parents, poverty
or
the fact that you don't have an attractive face or the fact that you have
the genes that deep predispose you towards
obesity and people recoil from overweight people.
Or because you turned out not to be so smart or
it turns out you can't control your behavior because of biology.
All that getting rid of the free will concept does
is be liberating.
You don't have a shitty soul because your life has not turned out that well.
And for most people,
that's the much more important outcome to all of this than deciding, oh,
I guess I really didn't earn my million dollars to be a millionaire.
Um, for most people
getting rid of the concept of free will is
not gonna make us like crazy and nihilistic.
Um It's gonna be liberating.
Mhm
But uh going back just for a second to one of the initial
points I brought to the table when it comes to the fact that
we do not yet have a complete science of
human behavior and we cannot 100% predict how someone
will behave in a particular situation.
Uh
What if someone heard your arguments of behavioral scientist and said, oh OK, Dr
Sapolsky, your arguments are great, the science is awesome. But
since we still do not have a complete picture of human behavior,
at least for the time being, I will refrain from making
absolute claims, uh claims regarding free will. I will wait and see.
I mean,
basically what I'm asking you is do you think that the fact
that we do not yet have a complete science of free will
uh would make uh such a claim that we should reframe, refrain from making
-- such absolute claims about free will uh make
-- sense, right? Um
Two types of answers there.
The first one is
um
yeah,
it's gonna be so hard to subtract out thinking there's free
will because we don't have the solid scientific facts yet.
For centuries,
all we've done over and over is figure out that responsibility
turns out not to have something to do with our behavior.
Turns out hailstorms are not caused by witches,
it turns out people who have epileptic seizures are not possessed by Satan
or even
within the last 50 years or so. It turns out
people come down with the disease.
Schizophrenia, not because their mothers were psycho dynamically,
monsters who hated them.
And all that happened at each one of those points is
you tell the mothers of,
you know, hundreds of thousands of people with schizophrenia,
it's not your fault. It's a neuro genetic disorder.
All you've done is freed them
all you've done when you figured out that this kid in your classroom where you're
a teacher just can't learn to read and this kid is just lazy and un mot
no,
there's something in their cortex that could be identified by
scientists so that they reverse letters in their mind.
They have dyslexia,
it's not their fault. We can't explain yet who gets dyslexia and who doesn't?
We have only hints from prenatal environment, blah, blah, blah.
But we know enough that
it is both intellectually and morally bankrupt
to decide that this child is lazy and unmotivated
and to instead recognize we've identified
their particular type of biological constraint
and all that's going to happen in the future is more and more and more of those.
And all we can be at this point is accepting
that a whole lot of things that pulls out the ugliest in us
in the way of judgment.
We're gonna wind up saying, oh my God, I had no, I had no idea.
It had something to do with that
or framed a different way. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, we can't sit there and say somebody with this sort of upbringing,
we can absolutely predict that they're gonna wind up going to
a top university or wind up being a multiple murderer.
Yeah, we can't predict that yet. The science isn't good enough.
The science is good enough
on a population level.
Any time you could look at an entire population
and say for every increased incidence of a horrible childhood experience,
you've just increased 35% the likelihood that they're
going to be arrested by the time they're 20
you got enough science.
At that point,
you've got enough science that you better know you have no leg to stand on.
If you sit there and say this kid this 20 year old,
what can I say? They're just plain evil. This kid,
if you 35% for each step,
there's enough science at this point,
there's enough knowledge there.
If you have, I don't know whatever percent predictability
that if your mother was drinking heavily when you're a fetus,
you've got this likelihood of having an IQ below this.
And someday when you're failing classes,
we know enough science already.
In all these cases, we know enough science because we run an entire society on
statistical guilt
and statistical wonderful accomplishments. And we know enough now to know that
those are not OK.
So I have one last question then
what would it take for, for someone to convince you
that you're wrong and actually free will exists?
OK? Here's, here's my pain in the ass response.
And the philosophers are going to like, oh come on, give me a break. Um
The version that they start off with is oh, come on,
give me a break is you've just done something, you've pulled a trigger
on a gun,
you just did something consequential And here's the muscles that contract it.
And here's the three motor neurons that just sent that command.
And if you wanna convince us that free will actually exist,
show us that those neurons
just did what they did
independent of what any other neuron in the brain was doing at that moment.
If you could do that,
you've just proven free will. And they say, oh come on, give us a break.
That's ridiculous. A demand.
I would demand a whole lot more than that.
I would say.
Show me that those three neurons just told you to pull that trigger,
having nothing to do with what any other neuron was whispering to it at the time
and having nothing to do with your hormone levels that morning
and having nothing to do with your history of
trauma and having nothing to do with your genes.
So show me that if you had changed any of those,
those neurons would still have done the exact same thing at that moment,
then I'll believe in free will
and you can't,
you can't show that because nothing going on in you right now
is anything but the outcome of all of that stuff that came beforehand,
perhaps unpredictably, perhaps in some nonlinear, non additive cool way,
perhaps in an emergent way that we can't even begin to mix. But that's all we are.
Nothing more or less and show me a neuron that just decided to do what it did
independent of everything that came before that millisecond.
And if you could do that, I believe in free will
and uh philosophers are gonna hate it.
But what I think any biologist who knows this stuff would say is,
yeah,
that's kind of what you need to show.
That's kind of the proof that is needed to show that there really is free will
and that's pretty damn unlikely to be able to show that.
OK. So let's see if someone accepts the challenge.
So,
yeah, so the book is again, determined a science of life without free will.
I'm leaving a link within the description box of this interview.
Um Doctor
Sapolsky, just before we go apart from the book,
would you like to mention briefly where people can
find you and your work on the internet?
Um
Let's see, I'm I am
a medieval peasant in that.
Not only don't, I do Facebook, I don't know how to, don't, not
only do I not do Instagram or any of these
things that my kids say that I don't understand.
So I have no presence there, but
there's a bunch of my lectures that have been put up on youtube.
Um
I teach a class at Stanford every other year on
the biology of human social behavior.
That's basically the last hour stretched out over entire semester.
And years ago,
Stanford posted all of those lectures up there and
one of these years I have to update them.
So
go to youtube.
Uh You'll see I'm doing the exact same ranting and raving
word for word and a number of those like talks that overlap,
but that would be a good place.
Ok, great. So, Doctor
Sapolsky, thank you again for coming on the show.
It's always a great pleasure to talk to you.
-- Well,
-- likewise, thank you for having me on and uh
till next time this is fun.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until the end.
If you like what I'm doing, please do not forget to share like, subscribe, comment
and to keep the channel sustainable.
Please consider supporting it on Patreon or paypal.
You can find the links in the description box of the interview.
The show is brought to you by N Lights learning and development.
Then differently check their website at N lights dot com.
I would also like to give a huge thank you to my main patrons and paypal supporters,
Burger
Larson, Jerry Mull Lawrence, Frederick Sune,
Bernard. So
all
of Alex Adam Kessel Matthew Winten,
Beg
Arno
Wolf, Tim Hollows,
Erica
J. Connors Philip for
Connolly. Then the
Mere
Robert
Winger
ruin
you.
Mark
Nevs
Colin Holbrook,
Simon Columbus, Phil
Kavanagh,
Mikel
Stormer,
Samuel Andre
Francis for
the
Agns
Fergal
K
and
Hale
Herzog
and
Hes
Mark Smith,
El
S
Wilson
JP
Charlotte,
Adam Hunt. Pas
Nele
Bach
Guy Madison, Gary G
Almansa
Zal
Adrian. Ye
bin Jean
Barbo
Julian Price Edward Hall
Eden Bruner
Douglas Fry Franco
BTO Lotti
Gabriel
Cortez
Orlik
Scott Zachary Fish,
Tim Duffy,
Sonny Smith, John
Ws Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino,
Luke Loi
Giorgio,
Theophanous
Griz
Williams and Peter Walla
and David Williams Theo Costa
Anton Erickson Charles. More
like
Shower
Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore
Larry, the Lee Junior
Old Herringbone
Starry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy
Zor and Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul
Barnabas Radix,
Mark Campbell Thomas Dubner,
Luke Neeson, Christo
Kimberly Johnson.
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Nowicki Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensley
George
Katis, Valentin Steinman,
Per
Rawley,
Kate Von Goler,
Alexander Hubbard,
Liam Dua
Away
Bi
ma
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular. And I
Herner
a
special thanks to my producers is
our
AJ
Frank Luca Stein,
Tom Ween,
Bernard
Ni
Fortis Dixon, Benedict Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin. Jean
Carlo, Mon
Negro,
Al
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers,
Mafi
Lavender as
you
could
and Bogdan
K
I
thank you for all.